From: Bertha Tsang <tsang@forty2.enet.dec.com>Subject: Queen Nefertari's TombI'd just like to make you all jealous by reporting that I managed toget into this fabulous tomb on the week of it's opening.Thursday 9th November found us on the 8am Ferry to the West Bank andthen a short drive to the Antiquities Ticket Office (not the one bythe Nile shore) only to realise that all the 150 tickets per day hadalready been sold.Friday 10th November found us on the 6am Ferry and we found a massiveargument going on at the Ticket Office.  Some Tour Leaders wanted inthe region of 55 tickets each.  Unfortunately the tickets hadn'tarrived yet, so they couldn't be sold yet and everybody was worriedthat they'd lose their place in the queue, especially with thenon-existant Egyptian queueing system.  Eventually a list was drawn up(the initiative of a Japanese lady who spoke Arabic) and we realisedthat being 11th in the queue we would be getting tickets number 136and 137.The tickets arrived at 7am with the Chief of Tourist Police whoannounced that individual tourists could purchase tickets, but TourLeaders would have to wait.  We hurriedly bought our tickets for LE100each and rushed off to wait at the entrance to the Tomb of Nefertariwhich didn't open until 8.30am.  Later, we discovered that the TourLeaders had only been allowed to purchase 4 tickets each.Eventually we managed to get into the Tomb.  People were only allowedin in groups of 10 and for only 10 minutes.  But the 10 minutes wassuperb.  It's by far the best decorated, well preserved (in terms ofbrightness of colour; and the amount of coverage of wall-paintingsthat still existed) and best restored tomb of all the ones that we hadseen.  The Tomb itself was quite large with several chambers all ofwhich were well decorated; the ante-chamber had one wall that had adecorated shelf built in, as if it were for an altar; stairs led fromthis room into the burial chamber which was unusual in that it had 4columns in it.  I can't do it justice - you'll just have to go and seefor yourselves!Unfortunately cameras were prohibited and the postcards that I boughtwere of a shamefully low quality.Bertha.