Prof Abdel Halim Nur ed-Din, head of the Supreme Council of Antiquities,gave a talk at the Egyptian Education Bureau in London on 17/6/96. It wasa most interesting session, and Prof Abdel Halim was passionate,forthright, and more than usually frank for a man in his position. The subject of the talk was the future of the antiquities of Egypt. Hetalked at length about the need for better training of his staff, and formore funding for the restoration and conservation activities of the SCA.He indicated that he hoped to obtain the LE100 million offered byPresident Hosni Mubarak in the year commencing July, and he expressed thewish that help might be forthcoming from abroad with conservationprojects.I cannot recall every detail of the talk, but the following points mayalso be of interest:Foreign missions: priority is likely to be given to new applications whichare concerned with restoration and conservation. Present missions are notaffected by this, but he gave the clear impression that all help in thatarea would be gratefully received.Giza: Pyramid of Khafre is presently closed and will be reopened soon witha better method of air circulation. The pyramid of Menkaure will thenclose and be restored. [no mention was made of any other activities atGiza lest anyone should ask me]Dahshur: work is in progress for the site to be open to visitors in thecoming months.Museums: work is now getting towards the installation stage for the NubianMuseum in Aswan. Plans are still afoot for a new Cairo Museum, in the areaof the Pyramids. Contracts have already been let for various feasibilitystudies etc; don't expect it within less than 10 years. Much considerationis being given to how the collection is to be divided between the old andnew museums, to prevent the older one being ignored by visitors. It islikely that parts of it will be used for study rooms, lecture theatresetc, as well as improving the present environment.Education of everyone, including Egyptians, in the value and importance oftheir culture is becoming more important. The SCA is trying to have bettertrained staff at all levels.Prof Abdel Halim ended the talk with a series of slides of theconservation work done in the tomb of Nefertari.Nigel Strudwick