The pillage and plunder continueDina EzzatAl-Ahram Weekly 5-11 January 1995Picture caption:The picture to the right shows but part of a collection of potteryshreds, shwepte figures, lithic artifacts, fossils, mummy beads andamulets. Smuggled abroad by an expatriate, he boasted that he hadcollected them quite easily from all over the country at poorlyprotected sites in the Western Desert and Sinai. "There were no guardsat all!", he said. To the left, high-rise buildings can clearly beseen at the edge of archaeological land. Such infringement is a greattemptation to robbers.Main story:News that statutes and scarabs have been stolen from the Temple ofMontu at Karnak is the latest proof that there is still a lucrativetrade in stealing the treasures of ancient Egypt.This latest incident also shows that no one can be sure exactly howcommon such thefts are„as this theft probably took place up to ayear ago the Higher Council of Antiquities (HCA) admits. "We are notexactly sure when the theft took place, but it must have been over ayear or two ago," said Mohamed El-Saghir, director of the Upper Egyptsites.The HCA says that 55 artifacts were taken. The robbery was discoveredby coincidence when a chief inspector of monuments noticed that "somewild grass was growing on the wall of the storage room of thetemple....Underneath the grass we found a hole in the wall throughwhich the thief got in to the storage room," Saghir explained. Therobbers selected the most expensive pieces from the collection whichdates back to the New Kingdom, and left 1000 pieces behind.The storage room is one of six in Karnak Temple. It was last openedover two years ago when a French excavation team put in some pieces."The storage rooms are never opened for regular check-ups. We onlyopen them either to put in or take out pieces," Saghir explained.Initial police investigations suggest that the pillage is the resultof the inefficiency of the guards of the storage room. "But none ofthe five guards are suspected of involvement in the robbery," Saghirstressed.The theft comes less than a year after a statue of the lion-headedgoddess Sekhmet was stolen from Karnak. Together they show that theorganised theft of ancient Egyptian artifacts is continuing today, andonly a small percentage is intercepted and recovered by the police.Greed and official incompetency are helping the trade to flourish,despite laws to protect the Egyptian heritage by making illicitdigging and smuggling a criminal offence. In fact, there is everyindication that the problem is becoming more serious.Over the last two years, close to 500 cases of attempted smugglinghave been reported. Most involve artifacts worth millions of USdollars. And for every case which is intercepted and the objectsrecovered, an unknown quantity find their way out of the country andinto the hands of collectors. It is a question of supply anddemand--as long as people are prepared to pay large sums for genuineobjects, there are people willing to desecrate tombs and temples toobtain them.The Higher Council of Antiquities is concentrating on curbing thecrime, but they admit that one Egyptian smuggler this year shippedover 200 Pharaonic, Coptic and Islamic monuments to Europe, then on toNorth America.Sixteen stone and wooden statues of an Old Kingdom official calledIpy, stolen from a storage area in Saqqara last year, were recoveredand are now exhibited in Cairo Museum. "But some were in a very poorcondition, and it took us a month of serious work to restore thebroken parts of these statues, and fit new bases," said Sami Abaza,the senior restorer at the museum.Illegal digging also causes serious damage to the monuments, andliterally thousands of unexcavated areas are being targeted bythieves. "When robbers find a tomb they dig indiscriminately," saidIbrahim El- Nawawi, a member of an HCA committee in charge ofrecovering antiquities. "Unskilled digging ruins the buried monuments,and the unskilled handling and packaging of pieces for transportationcauses further damage," he said. But how does one go about protecting these sites? Back in 1991,Minister of Culture Farouk Hosni responded to a question in parliamentabout the thefts by saying: "If I cannot guarantee the protection ofmy own house against robbery, how can I make sure that monuments,spread across the whole of Egypt, will not be subjected to robbery ?"Hosni's critics interpreted these remarks as a sign of recklessinefficiency, and within the last three years little has been done toensure that museums, temples and storage areas are properly secured.Nor has action been taken to put qualified guards who know the valueof what they are protecting in charge of the sites, which was thedeclared intention 18 months ago."The poor calibre of security guards, and the quality of some storageareas built in mud brick or wood is the real problem," said Nawawi."The guards are so poorly trained that they cannot face robbers whoare usually heavily armed, and some of the antiquities inspectors donot know the inventory of the sites they are supposed to protect,"added Ali Radwan, dean of the Faculty of Archaeology at Cairo Museum.Most guards are not sufficiently armed to stop a robbery. One guard ata temple in Kharga Oases confirmed this by saying: "All I have is asimple pistol, and that can never stop anyone from doing anything."More disturbingly, the involvement of officials in such robberies is awell-guarded secret. "The public prosecution records show evidence ofthe deviation of some officials," admitted Abdel-Halim Noureddin,secretary-general of the Higher Council of Antiquities.A finger has also been pointed at some foreign teams excavating inEgypt. In theory only archaeologists affiliated to a recognisedinstitution can apply for a licence to excavate in Egypt, in returnfor obligations like a commitment to restore monuments. But there arereports of certain individuals "with no previous experience orknowledge about archaeology who still find senior officials willing togive them a licence to dig", claimed Radwan. "Sometimes they do noteven have to approach an official of the HCA. They just give LE30 orLE40 to a guard and get away with what they want."This complex problem has no simple solution. While a concerted effortis made at one level to monitor excavations and control sites, it isoverlooked on another. While steps have been made to equip somemuseums and storerooms with hi-tech controls, others remainunprotected. In short, too many sites are there to tempt theprofessional thief to whom fear of capture is a minor deterrent faroutweighed by the potential reward.