Announcing Northwest (Washington State) Chapter of the American ResearchCenter in Egypt (ARCE/NW)We are pleased to announce the formation of the American Research Centerin Egypt, Northwest Chapter (ARCE/NW). This chapter will serve WashingtonState and promote the goals of the national organization (information onthe parent organization below).In addition to the member benefits provided by the national organization,ARCE/NW will provide members with a newsletter and web site that addressesall eras of Egyptian history and important Chapter news. Our web site willbe ready by 2/15. ARCE/NW also plans to offer informal discussion groupswhere lay and professional scholars of Egypt can learn in a relaxingatmosphere.We will be announcing our first lecture and discussion group soon.For more information on ARCE/NW and its events, please contact us by emailor snail mail (contact information and a list of ARCE/NW Officers andAdvisory Board Members appears below). If you have any questions, wish tobecome a member, or volunteer, or if you would like to contributefinancially to ARCE/NW, please let us know.Sincerely,Dr. Scott Noegel---------------------------------------------------------Officers:Scott Noegel- President <snoegel@u.washington.edu>Susan Cottman- Vice President <nfrtry@earthlink.net>Pamela Love-Secretary/TreasurerAdvisory Board:Jere BacharachAnthony CagleBenjamin HarerPaul LeroyLiisa PrehnNanette PyneDonald P. RyanRita Zawaideh------------------------------Postal address:ARCE/NWc/o Prof. Scott NoegelDepartment of Near Eastern Languages and CivilizationBox 353120University of WashingtonSeattle, WA 98195Phone: 206-543-3606Fax: 206-685-7936_http://faculty.washington.edu/snoegel/------------------------------About ARCEARCE is a nonprofit organization founded in 1948 by a consortium ofeducational and cultural institutions to support research in Egypt on allphases of Egyptian civilization and culture and to promote and strengthenAmerican-Egyptian cultural ties.ARCE is recognized by the Egyptian government as the exclusive vehicle forfacilitating research by Americans and American institutions in Egypt. Itprovides a permanent base in Cairo for American scholars conductingresearch on Egypt from prehistory to the present day.Programs and activities conducted and supported by ARCE and its chaptersinclude seminars, public lectures, short courses, educational tourism,archaeological excavations and surveys, conservation projects,publications, and the operation of research libraries.