INTERNATIONAL SYMPOSIUMCall for papersANCIENT EGYPTIAN THEOLOGY AND DEMONOLOGY:STUDIES ON THE BOUNDARIES BETWEEN THE DIVINE AND DEMONICIN EGYPTIAN MAGICThe Department of Mediterranean Studies of the University of the Aegean (Rhodes, Greece) and the School of Archaeology, Classics and Oriental Studies of the University of Liverpool (U.K.) invite papers to the International Symposium on the Ancient Egyptian Theology and Demonology. Our programme can host six to eight slots.Date: 27-29 June 2003Place: Cosmopolitan Hotel, Island of Rhodes, GreeceOrganising Committee: Panagiotis Kousoulis (University of the Aegean), Mark Collier (University of Liverpool)Theme of the Symposium: This event will deal with the theology of Heka, its application in practice and ritual, and the continuous conflict and overlap between the divine order (ma‘at) and demonic (isft) in Egyptian cosmology and everyday magical and religious activities. Special emphasis will be given to the various categories of demonic beings as the representatives of the diachronic forces of chaos and disorder that threaten and challenge creation. The Symposium will cover the whole era of the Egyptian civilisation from the Old Kingdom to the Coptic Period.Language: EnglishInvited Speakers: Hartwig Altenmüller, Jan Assmann, Christopher Eyre, Khaled Daoud, Paul John Frandsen, Katja Goebs, Yvan Koenig, Allan Lloyd, Joachim Friedrich Quack, Robert K. Ritner, Alessandro Rocatti, Heike Sternberg, and Penelope Wilson.Deadline of abstract submission: 15 April 2003Notification of acceptance: 25 April 2003Abstract guidelines: approximately 500 words. Papers should last no longer than thirty minutes, including questions.Fees: ?180 (including registration, conference material, 3-day accommodation and meals)Abstracts or requests for further information should be sent (preferably via email) to:Dr P. KousoulisDepartment of Mediterranean Studies, University of the Aegean, 1 Demokratias Av., Rhodes 85100, Greece. Tel: 0030-22410-99341, 99385-6 Fax: 0030-22410-99320 Email: kousoulis@rhodes.aegean.gr