Faculty of Arts, Department of Egyptian Language and CultureThe Department of Egyptian Language and Culture is part of the Department of Languages and Cultures of the Near East and has about 35 majoring students. Commencing January 1, 2004, there will be a position open for aUniversity lecturer, m/f (30,4 hr. p/w)Vacancy number: ...Duties- Teaching language and cultural history of Pharaonic and Graeco-Roman Egypt. Included in teaching duties are introductory first year lectures, as well as tutorials for advanced students on the BA and MA level. The language instruction includes different Egyptian language phases and script types, specifically Ptolemaic. Instruction in Cultural History includes history, culture, and literature, with emphasis on the Late Period and the Graeco-Roman period. Duties also include the conducting of exams and the guidance of papers, presentations, and theses.- The conducting of research in the field of Egyptian history, culture and literature in the Pharaonic and Graeco-Roman period, in particular the Late Period and the Ptolemaic studies.- The performing of managerial tasks within the department or the teaching institute.Qualifications	-	An Egyptologist with a Ph.D. and broad knowledge base.-	Teaching experience and research expertise (to be substantiated with publications) in the aforementioned areas.-	Mastery of the Dutch or English language. If the appointed lecturer does not already speak Dutch, he or she is asked to master the Dutch language within two years.-	Affinity with a digital learning environment is highly advantageous.Terms of EmploymentThe position concerns an appointment for one year in the anticipation of an eventual tenure-track position. Salary is commensurate with education and experience and ranges from a minimum of  Û 2.902,- to a maximum of Û 4.530,- gross per month with a fulltime position (in compliance with current salary scale of the CAO [Collectieve Arbeidsovereenkomst] of Dutch Universities).InformationInterested parties may contact Dr. J. van der Vliet (telephone 071-5272229) for job-specific questions, and Ms. E.J.M. Glas, personnel advisor, for human resources related questions (tel. 071-5272634,  E.J.M.Glas@let.leidenuniv.nl).								Please send applications, accompanied by a curriculum vitae and a list of publications, within three weeks of the publication of this ad, with vacancy number printed on letter and envelope (not via e-mail) to:Faculty of Artsattn: M.J.P. Okker-de JagerHoofd PersoneelszakenCleveringaplaats 1Postbus 95152300 RA  LEIDEN