The next generation of the Wörterbuch

Nigel Strudwick


My thoughts on the future of the Wörterbuch are restricted mainly
to some ideas of how it should be distributed when its second edition
is ready. I would only offer one short piece of general advice to
those who are actively compiling the work. I would advise against
making the Wörterbuch in whatever final form it takes all things to
all men, this will only make it unwieldy and unusable. I have no
fundamental objection to the input of information to the computer such
as grammatical analysis, but it should not be a prerequisite of the
form, if nothing else because scholars cannot agree on the details. I
realise that people cannot also agree on reading and meaning, but that
can easily be handled. A dictionary is an alphabetical word-list, with
references, which are absolutely essential in the case of Ancient
Egyptian. I would certainly advocate that even more references be
included in the future, since this is a fundamental role of the
Wörterbuch. I do not feel that it is essential that the references
be included in hieroglyphic form; although interesting and in an ideal
world a very good idea, I would argue that it would waste time that
the compilers could better spend on getting the basic dictionary
functions together. I would say that this was clearly realised by the
original compilers of the Wörterbuch.

Aspects of publication and dissemination

As one who would not consider himself a philologist, I would prefer to
keep the bulk of my remarks to suggestions as to additional forms of
publication and dissemination of the finished work, namely those using
electronic media.  I do not wish to see the demise of the printed
book, and a further printed version of the Wörterbuch would be
extremely useful. Nonetheless, printing costs are rising, and with the
present reprints of the dictionary costing in the region of 900DM, the
likely cost a new Wörterbuch is impossible to estimate.

In the course of the Berlin meeting in September 1992, at which this
paper was originally presented, I felt most strongly that the question
of the final form of the publication was being ignored, or at least
not being given enough consideration.

There is indeed a case for considering at the present only the issues
of encoding and treatment of texts, and of the form in which the
material should exist in the computer database.  A strong argument
against over-concern about the final form is that, if media additional
to the printed book are to be considered for the publication, it is
pointless to speculate on what might be possible, given the pace of
change, since that publication is a number of years away

I accept this up to a point.  That point is very simple: unless we
have some concept of the sort of material we wish to make available to
readers in the new Wörterbuch, data cannot be collected and
arranged in the most useful fashion.  This is my only real concern in
relation to the present project.

I should now like to turn to some individual subjects.  Dictionaries
are the ultimate reference work, and it is absolutely essential that
they can be accessed in the course of other work. This should be kept
in mind when considering ways in which the Wörterbuch can be
electronically published.

There are a number of possibilities. The most popular one today is to
publish the Wörterbuch on CD-ROM, accompanied by small management
programs which can allow the material to be accessed. This would mean
that the Wörterbuch can effectively be re-published on a regular
basis, depending on how much new material is brought in; CDs are now
relatively inexpensive to make, and the whole database can be placed
onto a CD and disseminated much more quickly than if it were going to
a printer.  A very recent development is the appearance of CD ROM
production drives which can be attached to present office computer
equipment, and which allow the user to make his own discs, rather than
having to send them away to a mastering factory.  In this way, once
the initial investment for the drive has been made, the Wörterbuch
project will not have to estimate how many discs to be made at one
time.  CD ROM is more cost-effective, since no-one is going to pay for
a new printed version every 2/3 years, but a CD service could be set
up for a subscription.  The Wörterbuch could also be kept ‘in
print’ this way much more easily, and hopefully might just make
this version cheaper than the original, but that of course depends so
much on financing and other commercial factors.

Another method which is less technically sophisticated but which
allows for more rapid updates of material is the use of the FTP
archive.  FTP stands for File Transfer Protocol, and is a means of
accessing read-only electronic archives using international academic
and commercial networks.  If the Wörterbuch project were to be
connected to the central computer resources at the
Humboldt-Universität, an archive could be kept into which data
files relating to certain aspects of the Wörterbuch material could
be kept and updated very regularly.  It would be incumbent on scholars
who use the archive to find the best way of using it; it ought to be
possible to keep information here which is not available either in the
printed version of the book or in the CD ROM.1

An example

As well as electronic media through which any future Wörterbuch
should be disseminated, software has to be provided to make the
material in the database accessible to users.  With the caveat
mentioned above about how quickly software goes out of date, I
developed very rapidly for the Berlin meeting a Hypercard stack which
shows one way in which the Wörterbuch could be put out. This is in
no way intended to be a formal suggestion, but just one way in which
the material could be used in a user-friendly manner.

Hypercard is a pioneering program in “Hypermedia” which handles
data in many different ways. It is written for the Macintosh and comes
with each new machine, but there are comparable programs which run
under MS DOS. Hypercard uses as its basic analogy for each file a set
of “cards”, which in Hypercard terminology is called a
“Stack”. The program does not use a traditional data structure
in the manner of xbase programs; the concept is that it parallels the
way in which scholars use index cards. Control buttons can be added to
cards, and these can be programmed in Hypercard’s own language,
which includes various special effects as well as more conventional
programming constructions. Graphics can also be added to cards, and it
is also possible for the program to display photographs. Externally
programmed commands can be added to the stacks to extend the range of
capabilities.

The advantage of hypermedia is that one does not have to proceed
linearly through the cards. Specific links can be made from one card
to another, or the programming language can be used to jump
dynamically from one card to another. Thus one can easily go where the
reader/user wants to, rather than having to follow pre-set
paths. These facilities which make Hypercard and its comparable
applications so useful as a way of getting through a disparate mass of
material.2

Some cards from the sample stack are shown in figures 1–4.

Fig. 1 shows the entry for the enclitic particle 3
Fig. 2 shows the Belegstellen for 3
Fig. 3 shows the index of words in Egyptian order in the stack
Fig. 4 shows the index of words in English translation in the stack

The buttons at the bottom of the cards allow the user to navigate to
different options. In the word index lists, clicking on a word will
take the user to that entry.  The emphasis is that there is no fixed
approach to the data, but rather that the user can move where he
wishes, when he wishes. It is also quite simple to add personal notes
to a card, rather like writing in the margins.3

The advantage of a hypermedia (or similar) approach as a way of
distributing the Wörterbuch is that it can be operated in a manner
akin to that in which most Egyptologists think: that is, we browse
around in information, jump forward a couple of pages as ideas strike
us, and then go back to where we were. A more conventional database
approach, although undoubtedly more efficient in certain
circumstances, such as searching a database for all examples of a
particular combination of circumstances, does not really reflect the
way in which we work with a dictionary.  It is also possible with a
computer to incorporate bookmarks into such a system as I am
describing; versions of the Wörterbuch in languages other than
German are likewise relatively easy to produce.

I do not feel I can stress this approach too strongly—we must not,
if we are going to publish the Wörterbuch in any method other than
paper, restrict ourselves to computer approaches which are
conventional, and by that I mean the regular database. Hypermedia
approaches offer us a wealth of possibilities to begin to emulate the
manner in which we approach the information which can be stored in a
computer. I believe that the main way in which we are going to be able
to convince Egyptologists to make greater uses of computers is for the
information on them to be presented in ways in which they do not
appear to require a complete change of approach. Once users can be
convinced that we do not have to change our ways dramatically, then I
am sure that progress will be more rapid.

Notes:

1 For an explanation of FTP, see my article ‘Electronic
communication— possibilities for Egyptology’ presented at the
1993 Geneva ‘Informatique et Egyptologie’ meeting.  Until the
proceedings of that conference are published, a copy will be available
via anonymous FTP at the site newton.newton.ac.uk in the directory
pub/ancient/egypt under the name Strudwick.Geneva.txt.

2 Some further examples of use of hypermedia may be found in my paper
‘Data-Management in Research and Teaching’, Informatique et
Egyptologie 7 (1990), 137–46.

3 A copy of this stack, under the name Woerterbuch.hqx, is available
via anonymous FTP at the site newton.newton.ac.uk in the directory
pub/ancient/egypt.

