ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION--
POSSIBILITIES FOR EGYPTOLOGY1

Nigel Strudwick

Inspiration2

I feel that there are two aims to our computer working group.  
The first is to provide a forum where we can present our work 
and discuss it.  The second is that we can come up with ideas 
which will enhance the value and use of computers within our 
subject.  I feel that the second is the more important, as the 
majority of Egyptologists are not au fait with what is going on 
in the computer world.  I would like to think that I can try and 
make Egyptologists realise what is possible, and then they might 
be inspired to come up with innovative practical applications.  

Last year in Cambridge I enquired as to how many participants 
in Informatique et Egyptologie were using or had access to 
email.  There was also announced the intention of setting up an 
Egyptological bulletin board.  Since that time I have myself 
started to use international networks for more than just email, 
and this whole area of connectivity is the subject of my 
communication.  My undisguised aim is to encourage readers to 
start using some of these ideas in practice.

Communication seems to be the essence of computing in the 
1990s.  The 1980s were the decade of the personal computer, and 
it was only in the second half of that decade that connecting 
personal computers with international networks was seriously 
considered.

At the moment, how do we communicate?  We write letters, we 
use the telephone, we may use electronic mail a little.  Data 
may be exchanged using floppy discs, as we shall do for 
publishing the proceedings of this meeting, but our ultimate 
exchange of information is in printed publications.  I am not 
going to suggest for one minute that we do away with any of 
this; rather I want to add new ideas to our armoury. 

  I begin with a description of the backbone to our 
electronic communication, the Internet.  I must stress that the 
connections I am talking about are "publicly" available--they do 
not require private networks which are only open to one company 
or organisation.

Description of the Internet

The Internet is a general description of the world-wide 
system of networks to which access is possible publicly.  This 
network links academic institutions, commercial organisations, 
and even the military, although it is not of course used for 
sensitive security and commercial information.  It is 
additionally possible to gain access to it for those who do not 
belong to connected institutions, since most public bulletin 
boards and information systems, such as Compuserve, have access 
to the Internet.

At present there are more than one million computers 
connected to the Internet.  These range from individual PCs 
through workstations to mainframe computers, and thus the number 
of people who are able to access the Internet must run into many 
millions.

How does one obtain access?

Much does depend on the policy of the computing facility of 
the institution to which a scholar belongs.  It is, however, a 
common misconception that the facilities I describe are 
available only to those in the sciences.  This may have been 
true once, in the same way that use of computers was similarly 
restricted many years ago, but where would Informatique et 
Egyptologie be if that were still the case?

However, I will concede that policies vary from one 
institution to the other, and that the authorities at some sites 
may be positively unhelpful; different institutions have 
different ways of charging for services.  In Cambridge, any 
member of the university can have a computer account which 
allows them access to the Internet and all that it offers.  A 
user is in general restricted only by the facilities available 
on his or her machine. Nonetheless, the reality is that most of 
us are attached to a university or research institute of some 
sort, and almost every such institution is connected to the 
Internet; therefore Internet access in some form must be 
possible.  If we spend much of our time away from the computer 
facilities of that institution, then it is still possible to 
obtain telephone access into it.

There are two ways of obtaining access to these facilities. 
The 'traditional' method is to use an account on a multi-user 
system, whether it be a mainframe or workstation, on which the 
software resides to carry out all the tasks. These days, 
virtually all such computers are connected to the Internet. 
Users must log into these machines to obtain these facilities, 
but then also have available other software packages, such as 
compilers, typesetters, and so on, as well as access to the 
considerable computing power such machines possess.  The other, 
and much newer, method is to have an Internet connection 
directly to the PC in your office.  Programs can be run on the 
PC which connect into a mail store, the news or Gopher servers, 
or permit access to ftp archives.  All this is achieved without 
the need to log into a local 'mainframe'; all the software runs 
on the PC.3

The second of these will only work if the connection to the 
Internet is direct, which means that the PC must be running 
TCP/IP (Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol; the 
underlying communication protocol of the Internet). This is 
typically an ethernet or Token Ring connection.  If one's PC 
speaks to the world using, for example, the X25 protocol, then 
there is no choice but to connect to the Internet through an 
intermediate multi-user computer.

The diagram in figure 1 shows the route by which the Geneva-
Cambridge connection at the meeting was made.

Remote login

The remote login facility on most multi-user systems makes 
possible several of the topics in this paper.  My demonstrations 
during the Geneva meeting were conducted on a computer in 
Cambridge, to which I connected remotely.  Therefore one can 
always reach one's files so long as one has Internet access.  In 
addition it is also possible that another computer will have a 
facility that your local one does not.  Connection is easy, as 
long as permission is obtained to work on that machine.  This is 
a way of accessing databases too.  If the output of the remote 
software is graphical, then if the X-Window system is available, 
it can appear on the local terminal as if the software were 
running there.

Email

Sending messages

Traditional email is the easiest to comprehend.  The writer 
decides to send a message, he addresses it, gives it a title, 
writes the message, and then sends it.  Depending on the 
messaging program, it is possible to organise incoming and 
outgoing messages into folders.

Email is stored in a mailbox until the user wishes to collect 
it, thus continuing the analogy with conventional mail. So long 
as access can be obtained to the site at which the mailbox 
resides, it can be read from anywhere in the world, which is of 
course impossible with regular mail.

Sending files

This is a stage further from email.  A message header, 
containing the address of the recipient is prefaced to a 
previously prepared file, which is then sent.  It arrives as a 
long message. It is usually sensible to compress files before 
sending, to save transmission time and charges.

Any type of file can be sent, although there are some 
intermediate stages if the file is binary or in a proprietary 
format.  One of the great strengths of the Internet is that it 
has a very simple standard for transmission of email and files, 
which is basically the lower part of the ASCII character set, 
which is something which can be handled by all machines today.  
Such files can be called 'text files'. However, most modern 
software packages also use characters from the upper part of the 
ASCII set, or the new standards which allow for over 32,000 
characters; image files consist of binary or hexadecimal data.  
For transmission over the Internet, such files are encoded into 
a form of ASCII text which can be decoded by the recipient.  No 
data is lost in this process: e.g. a Macintosh file will arrive 
with its icon intact.  There are several different encoders 
around; the Macintosh world tends to use Binhex, the UNIX world 
uuencode/uudecode, and there are several in the DOS world e.g. 
Boo/Deboo.

Mailing lists

Another approach to the discussion of a subject is to compile 
and operate a mailing list. Obviously, one can keep a note of 
those who are interested in a subject and keep mailing them 
messages, comments, whatever from other interested persons. But 
this is a real chore for the system administrator, and it is now 
possible for this process to be automated.  A program resides on 
the host machine for the mailing list.  A circular is sent out 
(manually) to those who are known to be interested, and those 
who wish to subscribe to the mailing list send a very specific 
message to the mailing list program saying they wish to 
subscribe.  Communications to the mailing list are sent as email 
messages to a specific address, and all these messages are then 
automatically relayed to all subscribers. Replies are directed 
either to the mailing list or to the individual person.
This is not unlike the way in which Usenet (see below) 
operates, but it has the advantage that knowledge of the list is 
not automatically available to everyone on the Internet, and 
thus there is less chance of peripheral people becoming 
involved. A major disadvantage is that the messages take the 
form of ordinary email, which can mean that mailboxes fill up 
quickly and conventional messages can be easily overlooked.
Mailing lists of this type have existed in subjects such as 
Classics for some time. By pure coincidence, in the week before 
the Geneva meeting, the Oriental Institute in Chicago announced 
that it has set up a list for those interested in the Ancient 
Near East.  This list began by soliciting comments on how it 
should be organised, but after its first month, submissions 
settled down to a mixture of useful pieces of information, 
requests for information, and news.4

ftp

I described above how to send files by email.  This is the 
best way to send the occasional file to different people, and if 
it is not wished to make files consistently available. However, 
if you possess information, such as an archive, which you are 
prepared to have others access in a passive manner, then ftp may 
be the best solution.  ftp stands for File Transfer Protocol; 
lower-case (ftp not FTP) is usual.

ftp can be used in two ways.  With a user identifier on the 
remote machine, it is possible to connect directly to that 
specific account and transfer files to and from privately.  I 
have recently been using this method of getting Postscript files 
from Cambridge to the typesetting service in Oxford.
The other method is called anonymous ftp.  In this way, the 
manager of the remote machine sets up a special ftp directory to 
which anyone in the world can connect anonymously.  Once a 
connection is established, files can be transferred back and 
forth very quickly.

Electronic archives

Anonymous ftp really comes into its own in interrogating 
archives.  Most major computer companies have ftp connect points 
from which can be obtained updates of software (not chargeable 
of course), or public domain programs.  For example, I recently 
downloaded a German version of System 7.0.1 from Apple Computer 
(electronic address ftp.apple.com).  Various universities also 
maintain archives of public domain and shareware programs for 
different computers.  For example, in the UK, there is a large 
archive for all types of computer at the address 
src.doc.ic.ac.uk in London.  Programs, data, and text files 
stored in these archives are compressed and encoded to make 
transfer over the Internet easier.

It is thus also possible to set up your own archive for 
people to access.  At the Heidelberg conference on Theban tombs 
in June 1993, there was a discussion on how to handle the vast 
amounts of material generated by an excavation.  It is for 
practical reasons (usually cost) only possible to include a 
cross-section of the material in the traditional publication.  
Putting other material on a CD-ROM is one possibility for the 
rest.  An alternative (or additional) possibility is to make an 
ftp archive of it.  If this material is accompanied by an index, 
others can see what is available and then obtain the sections 
that interest them.

Obviously copyright problems have to be addressed here, but 
they are not insurmountable, and in my opinion, are not really 
all that different to copyright on traditional publications.5  
How does one make the material available to the different 
computer systems?  If we initially talk about printing the 
material once it is retrieved, then the use of Postscript is a 
good starting point.  As I think we all now know, Postscript is 
a device-independent way of printing a document.  

What if we want to view the material on screen? One way is to 
have different versions for e.g. DOS/Windows, Macintosh, or in 
plain ASCII.  As the versions of major software packages on 
different computer systems become more interchangeable, this is 
getting easier.  Word and Pagemaker, for example, are available 
for both Windows and Macintosh; an even better case is 
Framemaker, which runs under Windows, Macintosh, and many 
different variations of UNIX, and all files are interchangeable. 
Other possibilities are on the horizon.  A number of new 
products claim to be able to convert documents into forms which 
can be read by other systems without the need for having the 
software and fonts on that other system.6 This concept is in 
effect a stage further than Postscript: Postscript enables 
documents to be printed across different systems, but these new 
programs offer in addition on-screen viewing and even appending 
of notes.

A further step on is that this is a way to make publications 
available without the print medium.  I am a great enthusiast of 
books, but there are some things which are going to become very 
difficult to publish with rising costs.  These or things which 
cannot find a publisher could surely be made available on ftp 
sites, so that people could obtain and use them cheaply.  It 
would then be up to the ftp user whether to print them out.
Helen Strudwick has set up an ftp facility in Cambridge with 
the co-operation of the Isaac Newton Institute for Mathematical 
Sciences.  This can be accessed at the electronic address 
newton.newton.cam.ac.uk, and the material will be found in the 
directory pub/ancient. Submissions from scholars interested in 
the Ancient Near East are most welcome, subject to ensuring that 
material stays within copyright and a few other guidelines. The 
Oriental Institute in Chicago is also setting up an ftp facility 
there which will contain their information and reference 
materials in addition to materials made available by scholars.

Usenet

A popular alternative to mailing lists has been the bulletin 
board, an electronic equivalent of the boards we see on the 
walls of our institutions. Users can post announcements, 
requests, etc. for others to see and reply.  There are very many 
private bulletin boards and also public ones.  In Cambridge last 
year, it was mentioned that one might be started by the CCER.
Most bulletin boards are designed for access via modem; thus 
to contact one at the CCER in Utrecht, an international 
telephone call would have to be made to the Netherlands before 
communication could begin.  The obvious disadvantage of this is 
that it is expensive on phone calls.  Some of the commercial 
bulletin boards have circumvented this problem by having local 
access points so that the telephone calls are only local ones, 
but it is unlikely that any international bulletin board in our 
subject would ever command enough users for local access points 
to be viable. 

But with the Internet, we have immediate access to any 
bulletin boards which are connected to it.  And on the Internet 
we find the largest of its kind in the world, the Usenet News 
service.

This works as follows.  People interested in specific areas 
set up "News groups" in which matters relevant to their subject 
can be discussed.  There are guidelines for creating these.  
Users can browse (depending on software) all the available 
groups, select those to which they do and do not wish to 
subscribe, and then read the news items (usually termed 
'postings') and reply either with another posting, or by using 
private email.

There are presently over 2,000 news groups on Usenet. They 
include all sorts of subjects: e.g. computing, social, political 
and religious issues, and recreational activities such as 
sports, cooking, music, literature etc.  The computing ones are 
particularly useful if you have a problem, since if you post a 
request for information, there are hundreds of well-informed 
people who might be able to help.

What happens technically is that the user runs a 'client' 
software program on his or her own machine which communicates 
with a local machine which is a News Server.  This machine 
communicates with other News Servers on the Internet, and they 
send each other news postings which have been generated since 
their last communication.  Thus when an article is posted, it 
will appear on your local news machine fairly quickly, but it 
can take a while for it to go round the world.

It would thus be possible for us to create an Egyptology news 
group, to which those of us who have Usenet access can reach for 
little or no charge.  The major problem I see with this is that 
access to it might have to be controlled, since Usenet groups 
are accessible to anyone in the world, and therefore there is a 
good chance that there will be a fair amount of traffic on it 
from non-Egyptologists. It is not unfair to describe Usenet as a 
form of co-operative anarchy.

There are ways round this, however.  The best way is for the 
news group to be moderated i.e. items sent to the news group are 
filtered out by being sent to a co-ordinator who would then 
filter out anything irrelevant.  The only difficulty with this 
might be that the moderator could be accused on censorship.

Gopher--a cross between Usenet and ftp

The newest information handling program is called Gopher, 
developed in 1991 at the University of Minnesota.  This also 
works on the client-server principle, whereby users ('clients') 
connect to a local Gopher 'server'. Each Gopher server contains 
a menu of items, in which local managers place new items of 
interest, files of interest, and so on.  For each item on a 
menu, a request is sent by the client to the server, which it 
turn sends back the requested information or takes a particular 
action. One of the menu options is to connect to other Gopher 
servers around the world.  On asking to see a particular server, 
the local server sends a request to the remote server, which 
then sends back the requested directory of information.   
Another option is to use a Gopher utility to search though other 
Gopher servers to find things of particular interest.  When an 
article of interest is found, it can either be saved to the 
local machine, or emailed elsewhere.

In this way, it is something of a cross between Usenet and 
ftp.  It does not have the anarchic feel of Usenet, in that the 
display of information is under the control of the Gopher 
manager (it also has an advantage over mail lists).  Therefore 
it is not suited as a forum for discussion, but more for digests 
of discussion. However, almost anything can be programmed by the 
manager into the menu displays, such as access to ftp sites, or 
direct connections to Usenet news groups. Its displays of files 
and items which can be retrieved is more controlled and easier 
to use than ftp, and users do not need to know the detailed 
addresses of the places where the files are held.  

Current opinion seems to be that Gopher exemplifies the way 
in which information management is moving.7 A Gopher server 
under the control of certain institutions can make access to 
data very easy.  As an example, a use for Gopher might be for 
the Annual Egyptological Bibliography.  New books could be 
notified to the server as soon as they are entered into the 
computer--this could be one of the most useful ways of 
harnessing the powers of computers for our research.8

Conclusion

This paper has attempted to show that better means of 
communication do exist than those used at present.  In 
particular, there are ways of sharing ideas and thoughts, and, 
perhaps most useful of all, ways of making our material easily 
available to any colleague who has access to a computer on the 
Internet.  We can perhaps start making tentative moves towards 
removing our reliance on slow and expensive ways of traditional 
publication, but only of course where the material suits the 
methods of dissemination I have been describing.

CAPTIONS:
Figure 1   Diagram of the Geneva-Cambridge connections used 
in the original demonstrations

NOTES:


1	This is the final copy of the manuscript. (C) Nigel Strudwick 1993.  
This paper may be distributed electronically so long as this copyright 
notice remains intact.
2	My thanks are due to the following for facilitating the demonstration 
at the meeting: Jean-Luc Chappaz, for putting me in contact with the 
technicians in the Centre Pedagogique, and to the technicians themselves 
for providing information which made the connection with Cambridge 
possible.
3	I must stress that I use PC in this paper to mean Personal 
Computer, and not particularly to the IBM and IBM compatible world.
4	Information as to how to subscribe to this list can be obtained by 
emailing Charles Jones at charles_jones@oi.uchicago.edu, or obtaining the 
document Chicago.ANElist.txt by anonymous ftp (see below) from 
newton.newton.cam.ac.uk in the directory pub/ancient.
5	Readers are referred to Dirk van der Plas' comments at the Geneva 
meeting, which appear elsewhere in these proceedings.
6	For example, Adobe Acrobat,  No Hands Software Common Ground, and 
Farallon Replica. I have seen none of these personally as of September 
1993.
7	There are other such information systems such as WWW and WAIS, 
although Gopher is probably the most widespread at present, as the client 
software can be run on most PCs as well as multi-user systems. Gopher is 
the only one of which I have personal experience.
8	Subsequent discussion with Willem Hovestreydt of the AEB has 
indicated that they are not fully convinced that the search facilities of 
Gopher are sufficiently consistent at different sites to make access easy.  
They have, however, no objections in principle to the dissemination of 
their information by electronic means.

